README.md, before:

# Elementary, Dear Automaton

Python is the de facto ✨💡🤖 _language of science_ 🔬🧪✨. As a self-directed learning exercise, I'm working on this Python implementation of an [elementary cellular automaton](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elementary_cellular_automaton).

The current implementation stores and manipulates state as a string, which is assumedly inefficient. Once I've finished with other bits and bobs, I'll compare the performance of this to using integer arrays or bytes.

### Usage

Run `./elementary.py` and follow the prompts, or run `./elementary.py -h` for help:
```
usage: elementary.py [-h] [-s STATE] [-p PAD_LEFT] [--off OFF] [--on ON]

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -s STATE, --state STATE
                        set the initial state (e.g. --state 01101110)
  -p PAD_LEFT, --pad-left PAD_LEFT
                        pads the initial state (wtih zeroes) to this length (e.g. --pad-left=20)
  --off OFF             character to show when a cell is off (default is a blank space)
  --on ON               character to show when a cell is on (default is X)
```
Example: Set the initial state (19 zeros and a one):
```
./elementary.py --state 1 --pad-left 20
                   X
                  XX
                 XXX
                XX X
               XXXXX
              XX   X
             XXX  XX
            XX X XXX
           XXXXXXX X
          XX     XXX
```
Example: Emojis
```
./elementary.py -s 1 -p 20 --on=🌳 --off=🌲
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌳🌲🌳🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌲🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌳🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌳🌲🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌲🌳🌲🌳🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌳🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌲🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌳
🌲🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌳🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳
🌳🌳🌲🌳🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌳
```
Example: More emojis
```
./elementary.py -s 1 -p 20 --on=🐙 --off=💦
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦💦💦🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙💦💦🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦🐙💦🐙🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙💦🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦🐙💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙💦💦🐙🐙💦💦💦🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦💦💦🐙💦🐙🐙🐙💦💦🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙💦🐙💦🐙🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦🐙💦🐙🐙💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙💦🐙
💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙💦🐙🐙💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙
💦💦🐙🐙💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙💦💦🐙🐙💦🐙
💦🐙🐙🐙💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦💦🐙💦🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙
🐙🐙💦🐙💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙💦🐙🐙🐙🐙💦💦💦🐙
```

### Status and todo

Currently only implements [Rule 110](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_110) and renders to console.

**Todo:**
- optionally write out the generation count beside the ouput... XX X XX X |2541
- allow setting the initial iteration that should actually be output
   --range 0 1000 = show-from show-to
- add a --delay option to set the delay between iterations when doing console output
- add a --stats flag that outputs the number of iterations and how long it took to run (only makes sense w/ 0 delay...)
- add a --no-wrap flag that treats cells beyond the edges as off instead of wrapping around
- allow outputting to image e.g. -output 110.png (only valid when capped number iterations via range)
- allow setting the rule to use e.g. -rule 110 (include a prompt when run w/o params)
- move from strings to integer arrays and possibly binary to be ⚡️?

Commit message:

Update: Added the --counter flag to show the iteration count.

README.md, after:

# Elementary, Dear Automaton

Python is the de facto ✨💡🤖 _language of science_ 🔬🧪✨. As a self-directed learning exercise, I'm working on this Python implementation of an [elementary cellular automaton](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elementary_cellular_automaton).

The current implementation stores and manipulates state as a string, which is assumedly inefficient. Once I've finished with other bits and bobs, I'll compare the performance of this to using integer arrays or bytes.

### Usage

Run `./elementary.py` and follow the prompts, or run `./elementary.py -h` for help:
```
usage: elementary.py [-h] [-s STATE] [-p PAD_LEFT] [--counter] [--off OFF] [--on ON]

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -s STATE, --state STATE
                        set the initial state (e.g. --state 01101110)
  -p PAD_LEFT, --pad-left PAD_LEFT
                        pads the initial state (wtih zeroes) to this length (e.g. --pad-left=20)
  --counter             show the iteration count
  --off OFF             character to show when a cell is off (e.g. default is a blank space)
  --on ON               character to show when a cell is on (e.g. default is X)
```
**Example:** Set the initial state (19 zeros and a one):
```
./elementary.py --state 1 --pad-left 20
                   X
                  XX
                 XXX
                XX X
               XXXXX
              XX   X
             XXX  XX
            XX X XXX
           XXXXXXX X
          XX     XXX
```
**Example:** Emojis
```
./elementary.py -s 1 -p 20 --on=🌳 --off=🌲
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌳🌲🌳🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌲🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌳🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌳🌲🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌲🌳🌲🌳🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌳🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌲🌳
🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳
🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌳
🌲🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌲🌲🌳🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌳
🌳🌳🌲🌳🌲🌲🌲🌲🌳🌳🌳🌲🌳🌳🌳🌳🌲🌲🌲🌳
```
**Example:** More emojis
```
./elementary.py -s 1 -p 20 --on=🐙 --off=💦
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦💦💦🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙💦💦🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦🐙💦🐙🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙💦🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦🐙💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙💦💦🐙🐙💦💦💦🐙
💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦💦💦🐙💦🐙🐙🐙💦💦🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙💦🐙💦🐙🐙🐙
💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦🐙💦🐙🐙💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙💦🐙
💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙💦🐙🐙💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙
💦💦🐙🐙💦💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙🐙💦💦🐙🐙💦🐙
💦🐙🐙🐙💦💦💦💦💦🐙🐙💦💦🐙💦🐙🐙🐙🐙🐙
🐙🐙💦🐙💦💦💦💦🐙🐙🐙💦🐙🐙🐙🐙💦💦💦🐙
```
**Example:** Use `--counter` to output the number of iterations/generations.
```
./elementary.py --counter 
🤖 Enter an initial string of ones and zeroes:
0000100001
    X    X|0
   XX   XX|1
  XXX  XXX|2
 XX X XX X|3
XXXXXXXXXX|4
          |5
```

### Status and todo

Currently only implements [Rule 110](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_110) and renders to console.

**Todo:**
- allow setting the initial iteration that should actually be output
   --range 0 1000 = show-from show-to
- add a --random param for generating an initial state of length X (makes padding moot)
- add a --delay option to set the delay between iterations when doing console output
- add a --stats flag that outputs the number of iterations and how long it took to run (only makes sense w/ 0 delay...)
- add a --no-wrap flag that treats cells beyond the edges as off instead of wrapping around
- allow outputting to image e.g. -output 110.png (only valid when capped number iterations via range)
- allow setting the rule to use e.g. -rule 110 (include a prompt when run w/o params)
- move from strings to integer arrays and possibly binary to be ⚡️?
